---
title: Ribosome Quality Control Complex - Frost Lab Research
layout: parallaxbanner
banner: /static/img/research/searle_desc.png
group: research
---
Age-associated diseases like neurodegeneration and heart failure are among the most prevalent causes of human morbidity. These diseases are also exceptionally difficult to study mechanistically. At the most fundamental level, we do not how long-lived cells – such as neurons or cardiac myocytes – counteract the accumulation of damaged or aggregated proteins over a lifetime. Our lab seeks to understand the protein quality control and recycling mechanisms that protect such cells from age-associated decline. This effort led us and our collaborators to co-discover a new quality control pathway that utilizes a ribosome-bound assembly named the Ribosome Quality Control complex (RQC). The RQC complex comprises an E3 ubiquitin ligase (Ltn1), two uncharacterized proteins (Rqc2/Tae2 and Rqc1), and the AAA+ ATPase Cdc48/p97. These factors are conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution, permitting us to perform functional and structural studies in yeast to dissect molecular mechanisms that pertain to humans. We demonstrated that the RQC recognizes stalled ribosomes due to defective or inhibited translation and triggers the degradation of flawed or “stuck” translation products. Mice harboring a hypomorphic allele of LTN1/Listerin suffer from a profound neurodegeneration syndrome2. Mutation of Cdc48/p97, moreover, causes the neuro-degenerative syndromes Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget disease and Fronto-temporal Dementia (IBMPFD), and some cases of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). These rare, monogenic diseases portend a broader role for the RQC in inherited and sporadic cases of neurodegeneration. We propose to determine the structural mechanisms by which the RQC recognizes stalled ribosomes and extracts defective translation products for degradation. Our proposal to combine structural, biochemical and genetic studies of the RQC complex will lead to a greater understanding of this newly-discovered pathway and inform efforts to enhance its protective activity in aging people.
